[THEME MUSIC]
>> Life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness.
We live our lives pursuing
happiness out there
as if it is a commodity.
We've become slaves to our
own desires and craving.
Happiness is not something
that can be pursued or purchase
like a cheap suit.
This is maya, illusion,
the endless play of form.
In the Buddhist tradition,
samsara, or the endless cycle
of suffering, is perpetuated
by the craving of pleasure
and aversion to pain.
Freud referred to this as
the pleasure principle.
Everything we do is an
attempt to create pleasure,
to gain something that we
want, or to push away something
undesirable that we don't want.
Even a simple organism like
the Paramecium does this.
It is called
response to stimulus.
Unlike a Paramecium,
humans have more choice.
We are free to think.
And that is the
heart of the problem.
It is the thinking
about what we want
that has gotten out of control.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Safety systems armed.
10, 9, 8, 7, 6,
5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0.
And liftoff on Endeavor,
going where East and West do
meet at the International
Space Station.
>> The dilemma of modern society
is that we seek to understand
the world not in terms of
archaic inner consciousness,
but by quantifying and
qualifying what we perceive
to be the external world
by using scientific means
and thought.
Thinking has only led to more
thinking and more questions.
We seek to know the innermost
forces which create the world
and guide its course,
but we conceive
of this essence as
outside of ourselves,
not as a living thing
intrinsic to our own nature.
It was the famous psychiatrist
Carl Jung who said,
"One who looks outside, dreams.
One who looks inside, awakes."
It is not wrong to desire
to be awake, to be happy.
What is wrong is to look
for happiness outside when
it can only be found inside.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> On August 4, 2010, at the
Techonomy Conference in Lake
Tahoe, California, Eric
Schmidt, CEO of Google,
mentioned an
astounding statistic.
Every two days now, we
create as much information
as we did from the dawn of
civilization up until 2003,
according to Schmidt.
That's something like
5 exabytes of data.
Never in human history has
there been so much thinking,
and never has there been so
much turmoil on the planet.
Could it be that
every time we think
of a solution to one problem,
we create two more problems?
What good is all this
thinking if it doesn't
lead to greater happiness?
Are we happier, more equanimous,
more joyful as a result
of all this thinking?
Or does it isolate
us, disconnect us
from a deeper and more
meaningful experience of life?
Thinking, acting, and doing
must be brought into balance
with being.
After all, we are human
beings, not human doings.
We want change, and we want
stability at the same time.
Our hearts have
become disconnected
from the spiral of
life, the law change,
as our thinking minds drive us
towards stability, security,
and pacification of the senses.
With a morbid fascination,
we watch killings, tsunamis,
earthquakes, and wars.
We constantly try
to occupy our mind,
fill it with information--
TV show streaming from
every conceivable device,
games and puzzles,
text messaging,
and every possible
trivial thing.
We let ourselves
become mesmerized
with the endless stream of
new images, new information,
new ways to tantalize
and pacify the senses.
At times of quiet
inner reflection,
our hearts may
tell us that there
is more to life than our
present reality, that we live
in a world of hungry ghosts,
endlessly craving and never
satisfied.
We have created a maelstrom of
data flying around the planet
to facilitate more thinking,
more ideas about how
to fix the world, to
fix the problems that
only exist because the
mind has created them.
Thinking has created
the whole big mess
that we are in right now.
We wage wars against diseases,
enemies, and problems.
The paradox is that whatever
you resist persists.
The more you resist something,
the stronger it gets.
Like exercising a
muscle, you're actually
strengthening the very thing
you want to rid yourself of.
So then what is the
alternative to thinking?
What other mechanism can humans
use to exist on this planet?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
While Western culture
in recent centuries
has focused on exploring the
physical by using thought
and analysis, other
ancient cultures
have developed equally
sophisticated technologies
for exploring inner space.
It is the loss of the
connection to our inner worlds
that has created
imbalance on our planet.
The ancient tenant know thyself
has been replaced with a desire
to know and experience
the outer world of form.
Answering the question
who am I is not
simply a matter of describing
what is on your business card.
In Buddhism, you are not the
content of your consciousness.
You are not merely a
collection of thoughts or ideas
because behind the
thoughts is the one who
is witnessing the thoughts.
The imperative know
thyself is a Zen
Koan, an unanswerable riddle.
Eventually, the mind
will become exhausted
in trying to find an answer.
Like a dog chasing
its tail, it is only
the ego identity that wants
to find an answer, a purpose.
The truth of who
you are does not
need an answer
because all questions
are created by the egoic mind.
You are not your mind.
The truth lies not in more
answers, but in less questions.
As Joseph Campbell
said, I don't believe
people are looking for
the meaning of life
as much as they are looking for
the experience of being alive.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When the Buddha was asked,
what are you, he said simply,
I am awake.
What does this
mean, to be awake?
The Buddha does not say
exactly because the flowering
of each individual
life is different.
But he does say one thing.
It is the end of suffering.
Every major religious
tradition has a name
for the state of being awake--
heaven, nirvana, or moksha.
A quiet mind is all
you need to realize
the nature of the stream.
All else will happen
once your mind is quiet.
In that stillness,
inner energies
wake up and work without
effort on your part.
As the daoists say, chi
follows consciousness.
By being still,
one begins to hear
the wisdom of the plants and
animals, the quiet whispers
in dreams.
And one learns the subtle
mechanism by which those dreams
come into material form.
In the Daodejing, this kind of
living is called wei wu wei--
doing, not doing.
The Buddha spoke
of the middle way
as the path that leads
to enlightenment.
Aristotle described
the golden mean,
the middle between two
extremes, as the path of beauty,
not too much effort, but
not too little either.
Yin and yang in perfect balance.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Pedantist notion of
maya, or illusion,
is that we do not experience the
environment itself, but rather
a projection of it
created by thoughts.
Of course, your thoughts let you
experience the vibratory world
in a certain way.
But our inner
equanimity need not
be contingent on
external happenings.
The belief in an external
world independent
of the perceiving subject
is fundamental to science.
But our senses only give
us indirect information.
Our notions about this
mind-made physical world
are always filtered
through the senses
and therefore always incomplete.
There is one field of vibration
underlying all of the senses.
People with a condition
called synesthesia sometimes
experience this vibratory
field in different ways.
Synesthetes can see
sounds as colors or shapes
or associate qualities of
one sense with another.
Synesthesia refers to a
synthesis or intermingling
of the senses.
The chakras in the
senses are like a prison,
filtering a continuum
of vibration.
All things in the
universe are vibrating
but at different
rates and frequencies.
The Eye of Horus is
made up of six symbols,
each representing the senses.
Like the ancient
Vedic system, thought
is considered to be a sense.
Thoughts are received
simultaneously
as sensations are
experienced on the body.
They arise from the
same vibratory source.
Thinking is simply a
tool, one of six senses.
But we have elevated it
to such a high status
that we identify ourselves
with our thoughts.
The fact that we
do not recognize
thinking as one of the sixth
senses is very significant.
We are so immersed in thought
that trying to explain
thought as a sense is like
telling a fish about water.
Water.
What water?
In the Upanishads, it is said
not that which the eye can see,
but that whereby
the eye can see.
Know that to be
Brahman the eternal,
and not what people here adore.
Not that which the ear
can hear, but that whereby
the ear can hear.
Know that to be
Brahman the eternal,
and not what people here adore.
Not that which speech can
illuminate, but that by which
speech can be illuminated.
Know that to be
Brahman the eternal,
and not what people here adore.
Not that which the
mind can think,
but that whereby
the mind can think.
Know that to be
Brahman the eternal,
and not what people here adore.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the last decade,
great advances
have taken place in the
area of brain research.
Scientists have discovered
neuroplasticity,
a term which conveys the
idea that the physical wiring
of the brain changes according
to the thoughts moving
through it.
As Canadian psychologist
Donald Hebb put it,
"Neurons that fire
together wire together."
Neurons wire together
most when a person
is in a state of
sustained attention.
What this means is that
it is possible to direct
your own subjective
experience of reality.
Literally, if your thoughts are
ones of fear, worry, anxiety,
and negativity, then you
grow the wiring for more
of those thoughts to flourish.
If you direct your thoughts
to be ones of love,
compassion, gratitude, and
joy, you create the wiring
for repeating those experiences.
But how do we do that
if we are surrounded
by violence and suffering?
Isn't this some kind of
delusion or wishful thinking?
Neuroplasticity is not the
same as the new age notion
that you create your reality
by positive thinking.
It is actually the same
thing that the Buddha
taught 2,500 years ago.
Vipassana meditation,
or insight meditation,
can be described as
self-directed neuroplasticity.
You accept your reality exactly
as it is, as it actually is.
But you experience it at
the root level of sensation,
at the vibratory
or energetic level,
without the prejudice
or influence
of thought through sustained
attention at the root
level of consciousness.
The wiring for an entirely
different perception of reality
is created.
We've got it backwards
most of the time.
We constantly let ideas
about the outer world
shape our neural networks.
But our inner
equanimity need not
be contingent on
external happenings.
Circumstances don't matter.
Only my state of
consciousness matters.
Meditation in Sanskrit means
to be free of measurement,
free of all comparison, to
be free of all becoming.
You're not trying to
become something else.
You are OK with what is.
The way to rise above the
suffering of the physical realm
is to totally embrace
it, to say yes
to it so it becomes something
within you, rather than you
being something with it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
How does one live in such a way
that consciousness is no longer
in conflict with its content?
How does one empty the
heart of petty ambitions?
There must be a total
revolution in consciousness,
a radical shift in orientation
from the outer world
to the inner.
It is not a revolution brought
about by will or effort
alone, but also by surrender,
acceptance of reality as it is.
The image of Christ's
open heart powerfully
conveys the idea that one
must open to all pain.
One must accept all
if one is to remain
open to the evolutionary source.
This doesn't mean you
become a masochist.
You don't look for pain.
But when pain comes,
which it inevitably does,
you simply accept
reality as it is, instead
of craving some other reality.
The Hawaiians have long believed
that it is through the heart
that we learn truth.
The heart has its
own intelligence,
as distinctly as the brain does.
The Egyptians believed that
the heart, not the brain,
was the source of human wisdom.
The heart was
considered the center
of the soul and the personality.
It was through the
heart that the divine
spoke, giving ancient Egyptians
knowledge of their true path.
This papyrus depicts the
weighing of the heart.
It was considered a good
thing to go into the afterlife
with a light heart.
It meant that you
had lived well.
One universal or
archetypal stage
that people experience in the
process of awakening the heart
center is the experience
of one's own energy
as the energy of the universe.
When you allow yourself to feel
this love, to be this love,
when you connect your inner
world with the outer world,
then all is one.
How does one experience
the music of the spheres?
How does a heart open?
Sri Ramana Maharishi said,
"God dwells in you, as you,
and you don't have
to do anything
to be God-realized
or self-realized.
It is already your
true and natural state.
Just drop all seeking,
turn your attention inward,
and sacrifice your mind
to the one self radiating
in the heart of your very being.
For this to be your own
presently lived experience,
self-inquiry is the one
direct and immediate way."
When you meditate and
observe sensations
within your inner aliveness, you
are actually observing change.
This force of change is the
arising and passing away
as energy changes form.
The degree to which a person has
evolved or become enlightened
is the degree to which
one has gained the ability
to adapt to each moment or
to transmute the constantly
changing human stream
of circumstances, pain,
and pleasure, into bliss.
Leo Tolstoy, author
of "War and Peace,"
said, "Everyone thinks
of changing the world,
but no one thinks of
changing him or herself."
Darwin said the most important
characteristic for the survival
of a species is not
strength or intelligence,
but adaptability to change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One must become
adept at adapting.
This is the Buddhist
teaching of Anicca.
Everything is arising and
passing away, changing,
constantly changing.
Suffering exists only
because we become
attached to a particular form.
When you connect to the
witnessing part of yourself
with the understanding
of Anicca,
bliss arises in your heart.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Saints, sages, and
yogis throughout history
unanimously describe one sacred
union that occurs in the heart,
whether it is the writings
of Saint John of the Cross,
Rumi's poetry, or the
tantric teachings of India,
all of these different
teachings try
to express the subtle
mystery of the heart.
In the heart is the union
of Shiva and Shakti,
masculine penetration into the
spiral of life and feminine
surrender to change, witnessing
an unconditional acceptance
of all that is.
In order to open
your heart, you must
open yourself to change, to live
in the seemingly solid world,
dance with it, engage with it,
live fully, love fully, but yet
know that it is impermanent
and that ultimately
all forms dissolve and change.
Bliss is the energy that
responds to stillness.
It comes from emptying
consciousness of all content.
The content of this bliss
energy born of stillness
is consciousness,
a new consciousness
of the heart, a
consciousness that
is connected to all that is.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]